



Network Working Group                                        W. Hardaker
Internet-Draft                                                          
Intended status: Informational                                  D. Dhody
Expires: 31 July 2025                                    27 January 2025


   Report from the IAB Workshop on the Next Era of Network Management
                               Operations
                draft-iab-nemops-workshop-report-latest

Abstract

   The "Next Era of Network Management Operations (NEMOPS)" workshop was
   convened by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) on December 3-5,
   2024 as a three-day online meeting.  It builds on a previous 2002
   workshop, the outcome of which was documented in RFC 3535 identifying
   14 operator requirements for consideration in future network
   management protocol design and related data models, along with some
   recommendations for the IETF.  Much has changed in the Internet’s
   operation and technological foundations since then.  The NEMOPS
   workshop reviewed the past outcomes and identified any operational
   barriers that prevented these technologies from being widely
   implemented.  It sketched new requirements for future network
   management operations collaboratively with the industry, network
   operators and protocol engineers, and developed a suggested action
   plan and recommendations for the IETF.

   Note that this document is a report on the proceedings of the
   workshop.  The views and positions documented in this report were
   expressed during the workshop by participants and do not necessarily
   reflect IAB's views and positions.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://intarchboard.github.io/draft-iab-nemops-workshop-report/
   draft-iab-nemops-workshop-report.html.  Status information for this
   document may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-iab-
   nemops-workshop-report/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/intarchboard/draft-iab-nemops-workshop-report.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 31 July 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  About this workshop report content
   2.  Outreach and Survey
   3.  Workshop Scope and Discussion
     3.1.  Session I: Past (lookback, analysis)
       3.1.1.  Reflections
       3.1.2.  Lessons to be Learned
       3.1.3.  Discussion
     3.2.  Session II: Present (identified problems & requirements)
       3.2.1.  Operator Feedback
       3.2.2.  Survey
       3.2.3.  Discussion
     3.3.  Session III: Future (possible solutions, recommendations
           and next steps)
       3.3.1.  Future Directions
       3.3.2.  Discussion
     3.4.  Key Takeaways
       3.4.1.  Ecosystem conclusions
       3.4.2.  Protocol conclusions
       3.4.3.  Modeling conclusions
       3.4.4.  Standardization conclusions
       3.4.5.  Additional work needed
   4.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Insights from Operator Feedback
     A.1.  General Insights
     A.2.  Data Models
   Appendix B.  Position Papers
   Appendix C.  Workshop Participants
   Appendix D.  Workshop Program Committee
   IAB Members at the Time of Approval
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The IAB organized a workshop in June 2002 to establish a dialog
   between network operators and protocol developers, and to guide IETF
   when working on network management protocols.  The outcome of that
   workshop was documented in the "Overview of the 2002 IAB Network
   Management Workshop" [RFC3535] which identified 14 operator
   requirements for consideration in future network management protocol
   design and related data models, along with some recommendations for
   the IETF.

   Those requirements were instrumental in developing first the NETCONF
   protocol (in the NETCONF Working Group) [RFC6241], the associated
   YANG data modeling language (in the NETMOD Working Group) [RFC7950],
   RESTCONF [RFC8040], and most recently CORECONF [I-D.ietf-core-comi].

   The NEMOPS workshop aimed to discuss the following key topics:

   *  Review the outcomes and results of the 2002 workshop (current
      deployments, state of the art) and identify any operational
      barriers that prevent these technologies from being widely
      implemented (limitations, hurdles).

   *  Sketch new requirements for future network management operations
      in a collaborative manner with the industry, network operators,
      and protocol engineers.

   *  Develop a plan of action and recommendations for the IETF.

1.1.  About this workshop report content

   The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) holds occasional workshops
   designed to consider long-term issues and strategies for the
   Internet, and to suggest future directions for the Internet
   architecture.  This long-term planning function of the IAB is
   complementary to the ongoing engineering efforts performed by working
   groups of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).

   This document is a report on the proceedings of the workshop.  The
   views and positions documented in this report are expressed during
   the workshop by participants and do not necessarily reflect IAB's
   views and positions.

   Furthermore, the content of the report comes from presentations given
   by workshop participants and notes taken during the discussions,
   without interpretation or validation.  Thus, the content of this
   report follows the flow and dialogue of the workshop but does not
   necessarily attempt to capture a consensus, unless stated otherwise.

2.  Outreach and Survey

   There has been a noticeable decline in the direct participation of
   network operators in the IETF and its associated discussions on
   network management protocols and operations.  Many operators
   prioritize operational conferences over standards development
   organizations (SDOs), such as RIPE, NANOG, APRICOT, LACNIC, AutoConn,
   etc.

   To address this, the Program Committee (PC) planned outreach
   initiatives to foster discussions and gather interest by engaging
   with operators at these venues and conducting information/
   requirement-gathering sessions.  Participants were encouraged to
   submit position papers or expressions of interest to join the
   workshop.  Additionally, a survey [SURVEY] was conducted to collect
   valuable insights to inform the workshop.

   The PC intends to continue engaging with network operators after the
   workshop to facilitate information sharing and gather their feedback,
   helping to shape the next steps and outcomes of the workshop.

3.  Workshop Scope and Discussion

   The workshop was organized across three days with all-group
   discussion slots, one per day.  The following topic areas were
   identified and the program committee organized paper submissions into
   three main themes for each of the three discussion slots.  During
   each discussion, those papers were presented sequentially with open
   discussion held at the end of each day.  On the last day, a
   discussion on the key takeaways from the workshop and possible next
   steps took place.

3.1.  Session I: Past (lookback, analysis)

   The first day of the workshop focused on reflecting on the past by
   reviewing the evolution of network management since the 2002
   workshop, analyzing both the successes and the challenges encountered
   along the way.  The presentations covered a range of topics,
   including reflections on the history of network management, lessons
   learned from widely used tools, practices in constrained networks,
   and the need to reconsider how network management models and
   protocols are standardized within the IETF.

3.1.1.  Reflections

   The workshop began by reflecting on the IAB’s role in shaping the
   evolution of network management, focusing on the context and key
   outcomes of the previous workshop, an assessment of the current
   state, and an acknowledgement of some regrets.  [SCHONWALDER]
   emphasized the need to shift the focus from device-level
   configuration to network and service-level configuration.  Key
   properties highlighted for effective network and service
   configurations included being Composable, Declarative, Reproducible,
   and Verifiable.  An operator’s perspective highlighted that the
   recommendations of [RFC3535], which led to the development of YANG
   and NETCONF, have been successful in addressing device configuration.
   In certain areas, the advancements in semantics and protocols for
   streaming telemetry have even surpassed the original scope.
   [LARSSON] stressed the need to prioritize service modeling, including
   operational state, to support closed-loop automation.  Furthermore,
   the absence of open-source tools, NMS and device model
   implementations was recognized as a significant obstacle to advancing
   standardization efforts.

3.1.2.  Lessons to be Learned

   [HARDAKER] emphasized that the success of Net-SNMP [NET-SNMP] was
   driven by empowering users through simplicity.  He stressed that the
   focus should remain on ensuring ease of use and adaptability of the
   protocols.  Emphasis was placed on the two distinct audiences for
   standardized network management protocols: toolkit vendors and system
   operators.  Their requirements for protocol simplicity differ, and it
   is essential to address the needs of both to ensure success.
   [BORMANN] presented an overview of the CORECONF architecture,
   showcasing how model-driven network management techniques can be
   applied to manage IoT devices, with a focus on the unique
   characteristics of constrained nodes.  Some participants noted that
   the binary encoding of CBOR has applications that extend beyond IoT
   networks.

   Drawing from the experience of OpenConfig [OPENCONFIG], [SHAKIR]
   emphasized that protocol definition cannot be done in isolation.  It
   must integrate lessons learned from implementation and large-scale
   deployment.  He highlighted the importance of enabling quick
   iterations, shipping rapidly, embracing open-source culture, adopting
   systems thinking driven by business outcomes, and reusing existing
   technologies rather than developing solutions exclusively for network
   management.

3.1.3.  Discussion

   The open discussion highlighted the divergence between vendor
   implementations of standards and what is accessible via YANG models,
   particularly when compared to CLI.  Common challenges identified
   included performance issues at scale, the steep learning curve for
   network management protocols, models, and tools, and the backward
   compatibility of models.  Some participants suggested that the IETF
   should focus on system-level APIs that address specific problems.
   Additionally, the lack of simple tools for smaller networks operating
   under tight timelines and budgets was emphasized.  A key question
   raised was whether the proliferation of protocols and languages
   complicates adoption, and if converging on a single approach would
   improve adoption.

3.2.  Session II: Present (identified problems & requirements)

   The second day of the workshop concentrated on challenges and
   emerging requirements for future network management operations.  The
   presentation emphasized the importance of validation, observability,
   automation, and the need for agile, incremental development of both
   network models and management protocols.  A compilation of new
   requirements is being maintained in
   [I-D.boucadair-nmop-rfc3535-20years-later].  The final presentation
   of the day provided a summary of the survey results and operator
   feedback gathered from outreach events.

3.2.1.  Operator Feedback

   [KELLER] shared Deutsche Telekom’s perspective, emphasizing that
   while YANG performs well for provisioning, it currently falls short
   in providing the operational stability required for validation.
   Achieving fully closed-loop automated and autonomous networking will
   require a greater focus on observability, particularly through
   advancements in streaming telemetry.

   [JIMENEZ] discussed the challenges associated with the SDN Transport
   Automation Platform, including issues with data streaming,
   scalability, diverse models, and mechanisms to secure the network
   management protocols.  The presentation also emphasized how
   advancements in AI and machine learning, along with the potential
   adaptation of protocols designed for constrained environments, could
   drive the next evolution in network management.

   Using YANG-Push as an example, [GRAF] highlights how standards
   development often fails to align with the needs of network operators,
   the constraints of network vendors, and the integration requirements.
   Most critically, it lacks an agile, incremental development process.
   The presentation advocated for adopting an iterative approach to
   standards development, focusing on delivering minimal viable products
   as part of the process.

   [CONTRERAS] emphasized the importance of reassessing deployment
   assumptions and incorporating updated operator requirements.  The
   authors are addressing these aspects through
   [I-D.boucadair-nmop-rfc3535-20years-later], leveraging feedback and
   discussions from the workshop.

3.2.2.  Survey

   As outlined in Section 2, the workshop program committee organized
   outreach initiatives to gather direct feedback and conducted a
   survey.  [SURVEY-INSIGHTS] provided an overview of the respondents’
   backgrounds, as well as insights into the most widely used tools,
   protocols, and APIs for configuration, monitoring, and other network
   operations.  Notably, the survey revealed that Ansible and CLI are
   the most popular configuration tools, NetConf is the preferred
   configuration protocol, and Prometheus and SNMP are widely used for
   monitoring.  The survey also captured feedback on network automation
   and streaming telemetry.  Additionally, valuable insights from direct
   operator feedback were also presented (see Appendix A).

3.2.3.  Discussion

   The open discussion featured feedback from implementers, highlighting
   how divergence in vendor implementations creates complexity and
   necessitates workarounds.  Challenges were noted in mapping standard
   models to internal device models and legacy devices.  The
   conversation also emphasized the importance of developing open-source
   reference implementations, compliance testing, and interoperability
   solutions.

3.3.  Session III: Future (possible solutions, recommendations and next
      steps)

   The final day of the workshop centred on exploring potential future
   solutions and identifying key takeaways, recommendations, and next
   steps.  Initial presentations covered topics such as the use of the
   Knowledge Graph Framework and concrete suggestions for future
   directions.  To conclude the workshop, the chairs worked to summarize
   the key takeaways (see Section 3.4) that garnered consensus among the
   participants.

3.3.1.  Future Directions

   [CLAISE] highlighted the challenges of integrating data models across
   different silos, protocols, and data structures, emphasizing the need
   for a machine-readable approach to expose semantics.  A potential
   solution was proposed using a knowledge graph based on the Semantic
   Web Stack, along with the need to define a basic ontology for the
   networking domain in an iterative manner.  [WATSEN] recommends
   prioritizing the following areas: (1) RESTCONF (including YANG-Push
   Lite), (2) the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA), (3)
   Data Model Adapters, and (4) Device Protocol Adapters.  [WILTON]
   recommends reducing unnecessary complexity, delivering timely
   solutions, fostering open collaboration between vendors and
   operators, and prioritizing simplicity.  Practical suggestions
   include focusing on YANG-Push Lite, introducing YANG 2.0 through
   incremental updates, developing NETCONFv2, and managing IETF YANG
   models as code or APIs rather than embedding them within RFCs.

3.3.2.  Discussion

   The open discussion delved into the absence of NMDA in OpenConfig,
   the history of introducing gNMI in the IETF, and the challenges of
   building consensus on common ground and converging on a single
   protocol.  It also explored approaches to handling YANG models within
   the IETF, such as leveraging GitHub, along with the challenges
   associated with its use.  The discussion emphasized the need for
   process experimentation, particularly at the working group or area
   level, and considered ways to involve operators in an iterative
   process.

   Some topics absent from the workshop discussions included tooling and
   strategies to support tool development.  The primary focus was on
   YANG and NETCONF/RESTCONF, while several other network management
   protocols and techniques currently used received little attention.

3.4.  Key Takeaways

   At the end of the third day, the discussion turned to key takeaways
   that had consensus.  In the process of discussion there were some
   realizations where additional work was also needed.

   [XXX: note at this point these are cut and paste from the slides and
   not properly edited/cleaned/moved around]

3.4.1.  Ecosystem conclusions

   These takeaways try to document the general thinking of the
   participants with respect to the entire Network Management ecosystem
   as it exists today.

   1.  The current network management protocols, models and tools still
       fail the ‘ease of use’ requirement.  Participants noted that the
       tools almost matter more than the protocols.

   2.  The overall ecosystem is still fragmented for both protocols and
       data models.  SNMP is still used extensively for monitoring, and
       the CLI is still heavily relied on in in many networks.  Popular
       protocols include SNMP, CLI, NETCONF, RESTCONF, gNMI, etc.

   3.  Documentation about the architecture and usage of the network
       management ecosystem is lacking.  More work is needed to create
       general architecture documentation, deployment guides, tutorials,
       training material, and getting started guides.

   4.  Transitioning between network management frameworks is
       challenging, just like it is for transitioning between other
       protocols like IPv4 to IPv6.

   5.  Model-driven network management is generally a success where it
       is implemented and possible to use.

   6.  More easily usable network management tools for the operators are
       needed.  The lack of open-source tools is seen as a barrier to
       adoption.  Tools need good use cases, example flows and better
       analysis of when and how they work and have been successful.

3.4.2.  Protocol conclusions

   1.  Netconf and YANG are not used much for monitoring tasks.

   2.  Netconf and YANG do not have full coverage on many devices.

   3.  Polling-based solutions are still frequently deployed.

   4.  Full coverage of NetConf support on devices does not exist today.

   5.  Polling-based solutions are still frequently deployed.  Push-
       based solutions are often desired but are not yet widely
       available.

   6.  False: Netconf for configuration has been successful in some
       larger-scale deployment

       1.  Let’s discuss this further on the list

       2.  Service config?

   7.  False: Full device control and configuration frequently requires
       CLI and screen scraping

3.4.3.  Modeling conclusions

   1.  Some YANG models can become too complex, though not as a fault of
       the language.

   2.  Multi-vendor compatibility support is required.

   3.  Even vendor-specific features, not just standardized protocol
       features, need to be exposed through network management protocols
       for a network management ecosystem to be viable.

   4.  Greater support for service-level modeling is needed.  Device
       level modeling can be a building block to achieve a sufficient
       service-level model but is not a complete solution by itself.

   5.  Network configuration needs to be verifiable to ensure any
       potential changes can be accepted by devices.  Model translation
       adapters (likely performed on the management station not the end
       device) may be the best path forward to simultaneously achieve
       this and a goal of supporting one configuration set across a
       diversity of devices with different internal models.

   6.  Full coverage of YANG models on all devices does not exist today.

3.4.4.  Standardization conclusions

   1.  A methodology of rapid model development procedures is needed to
       ensure model deployment can keep pace with new feature
       deployment.  We need a solution that significantly increases the
       speed and predictable timeline for developing and publishing
       models within the IETF.  New approaches and methods to make
       models live outside of published RFCs should be explored.  An
       experiment should be started to test a new rapid development
       approach.

   2.  Protocol and model complexity should be reduced to keep additions
       and changes to a minimal set of agreed-upon core features.

   3.  More standardization focus is needed on the scalability of the
       different roles of network management: monitoring, configuration,
       notifications.

   4.  Enhancements to network management protocols and models need to
       be backed by real-world operator use cases and expected adoption
       by vendors.  Vendors and operators will need to work together to
       ensure these goals are appropriately met.

3.4.5.  Additional work needed

   Here we list the things that the group realized needed significantly
   more attention in order to come to a conclusion.

4.  Informative References

   [BORMANN]  Bormann, C., "CORECONF: Managing IoT Devices with YANG
              Models", November 2024, <https://www.ietf.org/slides/
              slides-nemopsws-paper-coreconf-managing-iot-devices-with-
              yang-models-00.pdf>.

   [CLAISE]   Claise, B., Graf, T., Keller, H., Voyer, D., Lucente, P.,
              Lopez, D., Martinez-Casanueva, I., Peters, B., Fasano, P.,
              Ran, P., Cheng, W., and M. Mackey, "Knowledge Graph
              Framework for Network Operations", November 2024,
              <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-nemopsws-paper-
              knowledge-graph-framework-for-network-operations-00.pdf>.

   [CONTRERAS]
              Boucadair, M., Contreras, L. M., Gonzalez de Dios, O.,
              Graf, T., Rahman, R., and L. Tailhardat, "RFC 3535, 20
              Years Later: An Update of Operators Requirements on
              Network Management Protocols and Modelling", October 2024,
              <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-nemopsws-paper-
              rfc3535-years-later-an-update-of-operators-requirements-
              on-network-management-protocols-and-modelling-00.pdf>.

   [GRAF]     Graf, T., Keller, H., Voyer, D., Lucente, P., Claise, B.,
              Wilton, R., Huang-Feng, A., and P. Francois, "Agile
              Incremental Driven Development for Network Management",
              November 2024, <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-
              nemopsws-paper-agile-incremental-driven-development-for-
              network-management-01.pdf>.

   [GUDI]     Gudi, M., Pelov, A., Toutain, L., and J. Bonnin, "Evolving
              Network Management Architecture: Integrating CORECONF with
              NETCONF for Efficient Telemetry and Management", November
              2024, <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-nemopsws-paper-
              evolving-network-management-architecture-integrating-
              coreconf-with-netconf-for-efficient-telemetry-and-
              management-00.pdf>.

   [HARDAKER] Hardaker, W., "Lessons Learned from 30 Years of Net-SNMP",
              November 2024, <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-
              nemopsws-paper-lessons-learned-from-30-years-of-net-snmp-
              00.pdf>.

   [I-D.boucadair-nmop-rfc3535-20years-later]
              Boucadair, M., Contreras, L. M., de Dios, O. G., Graf, T.,
              Rahman, R., and L. Tailhardat, "RFC 3535, 20 Years Later:
              An Update of Operators Requirements on Network Management
              Protocols and Modelling", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-boucadair-nmop-rfc3535-20years-later-06, 25
              November 2024, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-boucadair-nmop-rfc3535-20years-later-06>.

   [I-D.ietf-core-comi]
              Veillette, M., Van der Stok, P., Pelov, A., Bierman, A.,
              and C. Bormann, "CoAP Management Interface (CORECONF)",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-core-comi-19,
              3 November 2024, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-ietf-core-comi-19>.

   [JIMENEZ]  Jiménez, J., Mansfield, S., , Pesonen, M., Torvinen, V.,
              and J. Karvonen, "Evolving Challenges and Solutions in
              Network Management", November 2024,
              <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-nemopsws-paper-
              evolving-challenges-and-solutions-in-network-management-
              00.pdf>.

   [KELLER]   Warnke, N., Geib, R., Horneffer, M., and H. Keller,
              "NEMOPS: RFC3535 and the forgotten word — Or Provisioning
              is only a subset of Network Management", November 2024,
              <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-nemopsws-nemops-
              rfc3535-and-the-forgotten-word-00.pdf>.

   [LARSSON]  Larsson, K., Lambrechts, K., and I. Farrer, "RFC3535, 20
              Years Later from an Operator's Perspective (Deutsche
              Telekom)", November 2024, <https://www.ietf.org/slides/
              slides-nemopsws-paper-rfc3535-years-later-from-an-
              operators-perspective-deutsche-telekom-00.pdf>.

   [NET-SNMP] "Net-SNMP", n.d., <http://www.net-snmp.org/>.

   [OPENCONFIG]
              "OpenConfig", n.d., <https://www.openconfig.net/>.

   [RFC3535]  Schoenwaelder, J., "Overview of the 2002 IAB Network
              Management Workshop", RFC 3535, DOI 10.17487/RFC3535, May
              2003, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3535>.

   [RFC6241]  Enns, R., Ed., Bjorklund, M., Ed., Schoenwaelder, J., Ed.,
              and A. Bierman, Ed., "Network Configuration Protocol
              (NETCONF)", RFC 6241, DOI 10.17487/RFC6241, June 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6241>.

   [RFC7950]  Bjorklund, M., Ed., "The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language",
              RFC 7950, DOI 10.17487/RFC7950, August 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7950>.

   [RFC8040]  Bierman, A., Bjorklund, M., and K. Watsen, "RESTCONF
              Protocol", RFC 8040, DOI 10.17487/RFC8040, January 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8040>.

   [SCHONWALDER]
              Schönwälder, J., "Composable, Declarative, Reproducible,
              Verifiable Network and Service Configurations", November
              2024, <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-nemopsws-paper-
              composable-declarative-reproducible-verifiable-network-
              and-service-configurations-00.pdf>.

   [SHAKIR]   Shakir, R., "Rethinking Standardisation of Network
              Management", September 2024, <https://www.ietf.org/slides/
              slides-nemopsws-paper-rethinking-standardisation-of-
              network-management-00.pdf>.

   [SURVEY]   "Next Era of Network Management Operations (NEMOPS)
              workshop survey", October 2024,
              <https://ietf.iad1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/
              SV_9vQxBRiZqDntarc>.

   [SURVEY-INSIGHTS]
              "Insights from Operator Survey & Outreach", December 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/interim-2024-
              nemopsws-02/materials/slides-interim-2024-nemopsws-02-
              sessa-6-insights-from-operator-outreach-survey-03.pdf>.

   [WATSEN]   Watsen, K., "Four Thoughts for How to Improve Network
              Management for Operators", November 2024,
              <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-nemopsws-nemops-
              position-paper-kent-watsen-00.pdf>.

   [WILTON]   Wilton, R. and N. Corran, "Device Network Management -
              Current Status, and Future Direction", November 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/slides-nemopsws-paper-
              device-network-management-current-status-and-future-
              direction/>.

Appendix A.  Insights from Operator Feedback

   [TODO: Check if this is useful in the RFC or should it be removed]

A.1.  General Insights

   1.  In network deployments, operations are typically at the bottom of
       the ladder.  It's the most squeezed for time and resources.
       Network engineers are not typically seasoned developers.  The
       development of needed in-house tools often takes years to
       develop.  There is a need for tools that are easy to use and just
       work.

   2.  Vast majority of smaller operators use CLI and open source to
       manage their networks.

   3.  There is debate fatigue.  The protocol/model debate is a
       recurring conversation.  The problem isn’t going away.

   4.  It was suggested that other domains (e.g., K8N/automation) are
       years ahead of the current network engineering stack.

   5.  Support for multiple friendly, stable and feature rich libraries
       for programming languages is needed.  Many DevOps routines use
       shell scripts, others use a high-level programming language.  In
       any case, on the client side, multiple programming languages are
       used.

   6.  Screen scraping is both necessary and evil.  This most often
       occurs when interacting with a device having only a CLI.

   7.  It was noted that there could be an outreach to Academia to
       establish programs to teach lessons using modern management
       stacks, and then a new generation of engineers could be helping
       to improve tooling and automation, with university (and/or IETF)
       hackathons.

A.2.  Data Models

   1.  In some network deployments, the focus is solely on service-level
       models, such that device-level protocols and device-level models
       are unimportant.  This assumes the existence of a device
       adaptation layer to transcode service-level models to device-
       level models and conform to the device-specific protocol.

   2.  There is a need for solutions to not hide vendor-specific knobs.
       Currently, vendors compete by differentiating their offerings in
       unique ways.  The reason why an Operator may choose a particular
       vendor is because of its differentiating features.  Whilst
       standard models enable conformance, they must not hide the
       vendor-specific knobs.  YANG deviations are a partial solution to
       not hiding vendor knobs.

   3.  It was emphasized that streaming telemetry requires picking a
       model and sticking with it.  It is quite a commitment and the
       current environment makes the decision harder.

   4.  It was noted that IETF's focus should be on defining abstract/
       service-level data models since it is the only thing the
       community may ever agree on.

   5.  There was a point about navigating non-device-specific models
       being difficult.  If understood correctly, the Network Engineer
       knows the CLI command but has trouble grepping for it in YANG
       modules defined by SDOs.

   6.  There was a wish that IETF and OpenConfig models would merge.

Appendix B.  Position Papers

   20 position papers were submitted to the workshop call for papers.
   All papers are available at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/group/nemopsws/materials/
   (https://datatracker.ietf.org/group/nemopsws/materials/).

   This is the list of all papers:

   *  J Schönwälder: Composable, Declarative, Reproducible, Verifiable
      Network and Service Configurations [SCHONWALDER]

   *  K.  Larsson, K.  Lambrechts, and I.  Farrer: RFC3535, 20 Years
      Later from an Operator’s Perspective (Deutsche Telekom) [LARSSON]

   *  W.  Hardaker: Lessons Learned from 30 Years of Net-SNMP [HARDAKER]

   *  C.  Bormann: CORECONF: Managing IoT Devices with YANG Models
      [BORMANN]

   *  R.  Shakir: Rethinking Standardisation of Network Management
      [SHAKIR]

   *  N.  Warnke, R.  Geib, M.  Horneffer, and H.  Keller: NEMOPS:
      RFC3535 and the forgotten word — Or Provisioning is only a subset
      of Network Management [KELLER]

   *  J.  Jiménez, S.  Mansfield, R.  Rodriguez A., M.  Pesonen, V.
      Torvinen, and J.  Karvonen: Evolving Challenges and Solutions in
      Network Management [JIMENEZ]

   *  M.  Boucadair, L.  M.  Contreras, O.  Gonzalez de Dios, T.  Graf,
      R.  Rahman, and L.  Tailhardat: RFC 3535, 20 Years Later: An
      Update of Operators Requirements on Network Management Protocols
      and Modelling [CONTRERAS]

   *  T.  Graf, H.  Keller, D.  Voyer, P.  Lucente, B.  Claise, R.
      Wilton, A.  Huang-Feng, and P.  Francois: Agile Incremental Driven
      Development for Network Management [GRAF]

   *  B.  Claise, T.  Graf, H.  Keller, D.  Voyer, P.  Lucente, D.
      Lopez, I.  D.  Martinez-Casanueva, B.  Peters, P.  Fasano, P.
      Ran, W.  Cheng, and M.  Mackey: Knowledge Graph Framework for
      Network Operations [CLAISE]

   *  K.  Watsen: Four Thoughts for How to Improve Network Management
      for Operators [WATSEN]

   *  R.  Wilton and N.  Corran: Device Network Management: Current
      Status and Future Direction [WILTON]

   *  M.  Gudi, A.  Pelov, L.  Toutain, and J.-M.  Bonnin: Evolving
      Network Management Architecture: Integrating CORECONF with NETCONF
      for Efficient Telemetry and Management [GUDI]

Appendix C.  Workshop Participants

   The workshop participants were Alex Huang, Alexander Clemm, Alexander
   PELOV, Benoit Claise, Boris Khasanov, Brad Peters (nbn), Carsten
   Bormann, Chongfeng Xie, Cindy Morgan, Dan Voyer, Darren Loher, Dean
   Bogdanovic, Dean Bogdanović, Dhruv Dhody, Diego Lopez, Ebben Aries,
   Frank (Chong Feng), Holger Keller, Ian Farrer, Jaime Jimenez, James
   Cumming, Janne Karvonen, Jason Sterne, Jiaming Ye, Jinming Li, John
   Carson, Julien Maisonneuve, Jürgen Schönwälder, Kent Watsen, Kris
   Lambrechts, Kristian Larsson, Laurent Ciavaglia, Laurent Toutain, Liz
   Flynn, Luis M.  Contreras (Telefonica), Mahesh Jethanandani, Manoj
   Gudi, Martin Horneffer, Matthew Bocci, Med Boucadair, Michael Mackey,
   Michael Richardson, Michael Scharf, Mikko Pesonen, Nacho Dominguez
   (Telefonica), Naveen Achyuta, Nick Corran, Nils Warnke, Oscar
   Gonzalez de Dios, Paolo Lucente, Parisa Foroughi, Per Andersson, Phil
   Shafer, Qin Wu, Qiufang Ma, Raquel Rodriguez, Reshad, Reshad Rahman,
   Rob Shakir, Rob Wilton, Roland Bless (KIT), Roland Schott, Rüdiger
   Geib, Rui Zhuang, Ruibo Han, Sabine Randriamasy, Scott Mansfield
   (Ericsson), Scott Robohn, Shengnan Yue, Suresh Krishnan, Thomas Graf,
   Toerless Eckert, Wangbo, Warren Kumari, Wes Hardaker, Wim Henderickx,
   Xue Yang, Y.  Richard Yang, Yangbo, Yisong Liu, and Zhenqiang Li.

Appendix D.  Workshop Program Committee

   The workshop program committee members were Wes Hardaker, Dhruv
   Dhody, Qin Wu, Suresh Krishnan, Benoît Claise, Mohamed Boucadair,
   Mahesh Jethanandani, Kent Watsen, and Warren Kumari.

IAB Members at the Time of Approval

   Internet Architecture Board members at the time this document was
   approved for publication were: TODO

Acknowledgments

   TBD

Authors' Addresses

   Wes Hardaker
   Email: hardaker@isi.edu


   Dhruv Dhody
   Email: dd@dhruvdhody.com
